Setting Up Node.js on Windows
Visit the Node.js Official Website
Open a web browser and go to nodejs.org.
Choose the LTS version (recommended for stability) over Current.

Download the Installer
Click the LTS button to download the Windows installer (.msi file).
Ensure the correct architecture (usually 64-bit; check if your system is 32-bit).

Run the Installer
Locate the .msi file (usually in Downloads) and double-click it.
Follow the Node.js Setup Wizard and click Next.

Accept the License Agreement
Read the license, check I accept the terms, and click Next.

Choose Installation Location
Use the default path (e.g., C:\Program Files\nodejs\) and click Next.
Optionally, select a custom location.

Select Components
Keep default components (Node.js runtime, npm, documentation) selected and click Next.
Ensure Add to PATH is checked for command-line access.

Install Node.js
Click Install. Grant permission if prompted. Wait for completion.

Complete the Installation
Click Finish to exit the wizard.

Verify the Installation
Open Command Prompt (Win + R, type cmd, press Enter).
Run: node -v (should show version, e.g., v18.17.1).
Run: npm -v (should show version, e.g., 9.6.7).

Test Node.js
Create a file named test.js in Notepad with:

console.log("Hello, Node.js!");
                
Save it (e.g., C:\Users\YourName\test.js).
In Command Prompt, navigate to the folder (cd C:\Users\YourName).
Run: node test.js. Output should be Hello, Node.js!.

Setting Up Node.js on Linux (Ubuntu)
Open the Terminal
Press Ctrl + Alt + T to open the Terminal.

Update Package Lists
Run:

sudo apt update
                
Enter your password if prompted.

Install Curl
Install curl (if not installed) with:

sudo apt install curl
                
Add NodeSource Repository
Use NodeSource for the latest LTS version. Run:

curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_lts.x | sudo -E bash -
                
Install Node.js and npm
Install with:

sudo apt install -y nodejs
                
Verify the Installation
Check Node.js version: node -v (e.g., v18.17.1).
Check npm version: npm -v (e.g., 9.6.7).

Test Node.js
Create test.js with:

echo 'console.log("Hello, Node.js!");' > test.js
                
Run: node test.js. Output: Hello, Node.js!.

Optional: Install a Text Editor
Install Visual Studio Code:

sudo snap install code --classic
                
Launch with code.

Setting Up Node.js on macOS
Visit the Node.js Official Website
Go to nodejs.org and select LTS.

Download the Installer
Click LTS to download the macOS installer (.pkg file).

Run the Installer
Double-click the .pkg file (in Downloads) to launch the installer.

Follow the Installation Wizard
Click Continue, accept the license, and choose the default destination.
Click Install and enter your admin password.

Complete the Installation
Click Close to finish.

Open the Terminal
Press Cmd + T or search for Terminal in Spotlight.

Verify the Installation
Run: node -v (e.g., v18.17.1).
Run: npm -v (e.g., 9.6.7).

Test Node.js
Create test.js with:

echo 'console.log("Hello, Node.js!");' > test.js
                
Run: node test.js. Output: Hello, Node.js!.

Optional: Install a Text Editor
Download Visual Studio Code from code.visualstudio.com.
Move to Applications and open it.